Bob had noticed something unusual
with Dave's laptop.
"Dave, why is it that after the boot process
your system goes directly
to the command line interface?" he asks.
"Mine always loads up
the graphical interface."
Dave replies,
"Ah, that's because I have specifically
set up my system
to boot into a nongraphical view."
Dave explains that
Linux can run in multiple modes.
You already know one of them,
the graphical mode.
Besides the graphical mode
there are several other modes of operation.
These modes are set
by something called the run level.
To see the operation mode set in the system
run the command called runlevel
from the shell
and you should get a number like this.
Dave's system
the command returns a value of 3
which means he is running runlevel 3.
On Bob's laptop it is set to 5.
The operation mode
which provides a graphical interface
is called the run level 5.
The runlevel 3 implies a nongraphical mode.
During boot
the init process checks the run level.
It makes sure that all programs
needed to get the system operational
in that mode are started.
For example, the graphical user mode
requires a display manager service
to run for the GUI to work.
However, this service is not required
for the nongraphical mode.
In the boot process section
we saw that system D
is used as the init process
in most new Linux distributions
such as Ubuntu 18.04.
In system D runlevels are called targets.
The runlevel 5
is called the graphical target
and runlevel 3
is called the multi-user target.
There are other run levels and targets in use
but these are the two
that are most commonly used.
Check out the reference section
for the complete list.
Now that we are familiar with runlevels
and system D target units,
let's take a look
at how we can change these values
from the shell.
To see the default target,
run the command systemctl get-default.
This command looks up the file located at
/etc/systemd/system/default.target.
In this case
you can see that the default.target file
is a symbolic link or a shortcut
to the graphical.target unit file.
This file is located under
/lib/systemd/systemdirectory.
To change the default target
we can make use of the systemctl
set-default command
with the desired target
as the command argument.
Here we are changing the default target
from graphical to multi-user.
This is equivalent
to switching the runlevel from 5 to 3.